you could you can kind of think of
existential psychology as having like a
dark side and a light side in some ways
and terror management and becker that
was kind of you know the the the edgier
dark side which is ultimately what
meaning about is
it's a defense system right like people
are afraid
people you know people are aware of
these vulnerabilities and it makes them
afraid and so they dogmatically cling to
beliefs in order to reduce that fear so
that's right so it's an extension of
freud's notions of religious belief as a
as a defense mechanism and and you can
see the freudianism sleep slipping
through there and that is the issue is
it
what's the difference between a defense
and an adaptation
right and you know on one hand culture
you could say that your identification
with your culture allows you symbolic
immortality but you could also say yeah
well it builds your house so you don't
freeze to death in the winter too right
so it's not just symbolically present
preventing your death say let's say or
protecting yourself against your fear of
death it's actually stopping you from
dying which is not a trivial
issue
[Music]
hello everyone i'm pleased to have with
me as a guest today dr clay routledge
he's a faculty scholar in the sheila and
robert shelly institute for global
innovation and growth professor of
management at north dakota state
university and senior research fellow at
archbridge institute
dr routledge studies among other topics
meaning belief atheism magical thinking
existential economics and
entrepreneurship
he is the author of nostalgia a
psychological resource and supernatural
death meaning and the power of the
invisible word he has published more
than 100 academic articles co-edited
three books and written numerous pieces
for outlets such as the new york times
the wall street journal newsweek harvard
business review and the national review
i first ran across his work in newsweek
where he wrote a interesting article on
what you might describe as the potential
moral failings of universal basic income
and it's failure to address people's
need for meaning in addition to their
the necessity for economic security i
looked up his website and and found that
his lab does unique work there aren't a
lot of psychological labs that are
concentrating as intently as dr
routledge on meaning and belief and and
that sort of thing and so i thought it
would be very much worth talking to him
um
especially also given his emphasis on
economics which adds an additional twist
to his interests so
welcome dr rutledge clay thank you very
much for for agreeing to talk with me
today
thank you for having me on dr peterson
it's a it's a great privilege to be on
your podcast
well so so fill me in a bit uh tell me
what your lab has been doing and how you
got interested in doing what you're
doing and also how you managed it
because your research interests i
wouldn't say are exactly center of the
road by academic psychological standards
so but you've been very successful with
it
yeah so i mean i'm a bit of an atypical
academic in a lot of ways
one when i was in college i didn't even
think i was supposed to be there i
remember i had a high school guidance
counselor who said well you're not
college material so
you know you need to figure out you know
a job that that you can do when you
graduate
but why did he think why did he think
you weren't college material
i'm a late bloomer i i wasn't a great i
wasn't a great student i you know um
this was
this was decades ago and you know now
i'd probably be diagnosed with adhd or
something like that i mean i was just a
very active young young male who you
know wasn't particularly interested in
sitting still in classes and reading
books and things like that i wanted to
be engaged doing you know doing active
things so i wasn't a great student
and you know but i think i was just kind
of a late bloomer and then by the time i
graduated and i i thought well i should
go to call i should you know give it a
shot
and i went to a local community college
and i pretty much worked um often times
full-time as like a security guard and a
bunch of other jobs i was uh i've done
martial arts much of my life and so i
was a part-time martial arts instructor
and i was just going to college and i
was actually originally a criminal
justice major because i thought well i
should probably do something like be a
police officer you know something a
little bit more more active
yeah and you know i didn't i i wasn't
really into that took a psychology class
which is common as part of a criminal
justice major and i was like oh wow this
is this seems pretty cool and so i got
him you know i got interested in
psychology but even still when i you
know i finished my psychology degree i
had no intentions of going to graduate
school
i i spent a few years actually working
in outpatient clinical mental health and
also in social work which we can get
into later because i do think that
some of those experiences have you know
have really influenced how i think about
things just you know the practical
experience of working with people in the
community
um sometimes it was because of severe
mental illness sometimes it was just you
know people that had you know real
social dysfunction and you know a lot of
problems in their family and in their in
their personal lives right so you had
the opportunity to do something that was
clinical to bring your knowledge down to
earth so to speak
yeah absolutely and i you know i just
had an undergraduate degree i wasn't a
psychologist like a clinical
psychologist or anything i i was
basically a social worker an outpatient
caseworker but i had you know dozens of
you know clients that i was responsible
for
you know kind of checking on them making
sure they were medication compliant or
doing the things part that where they
were supposed to do as part of their
treatment plan and it was a very
it was a very interesting and educating
experience
i did that but then decided you know you
know i want to go to school i want to
try graduate school i had a professor
who was as an undergraduate who she was
very much like you should you should go
to graduate school you would be great it
would you know you would do really well
and you know i just wasn't super
confident about it but then i took the
gre
and i did you know pretty well i think
and and i applied to a few i only
applied i think four programs i got into
two of them and then i went to
school at the university of missouri so
that's a long way of saying when i
started school
which was in september of um
2001 then that was when right when the
um 9 11
happened like it was within my first
week or two
of of classes in fact i remember i went
in graduate school in graduate school
yeah i remember i went to this really um
i had this anova like you know when
you're in grad school you take these
quantitative site classes out of class i
think it was just called a nova
and you know i was in this class and
then you know it was kind of announced
that hey there's this attack happening
and i saw some some of it was unfolding
before i left the house in the morning
but we didn't know what was going on and
then i was in this grad seminar and our
professor actually sent us home
and said everyone needs to go home
there's a terrorist attack something
happening so this was at the very
beginning of my first semester of
graduate school
at the time i was in more of a
personality
and
social psych
like health lab
it was an alcohol lab and so we were
really looking at like very practical
um very practical outcomes related to
risky behavior and as predicted by
individual differences but when 9 11
happened i just started thinking about i
mean it just really
astonished me how you had
um these people that are
because of a cause or something they
believed in are willing to you sort of
override their
self-preservation instinct
um and you know and die in in the
service of an ideology yeah well that
was something that really compelled me
too i was very curious all the way
through my graduate school career about
what it was about belief that was so
compelling that people were willing to
risk their lives or to kill or to commit
atrocities all of that so what is it
that belief does that's so
psychologically significant that it
seems to override everything else it's a
hell of a question
right right and so it just happened by
chance that i was at the university of
missouri
um doing my you know starting graduate
school and after this happened and i was
thinking about these questions there was
a a scholar there um dr jamie arndt
who this was his whole area of research
was he was in an area i don't know if
you're familiar with called terror
management theory yes and
and so he was doing research in his lab
not on terrorism or anything like that
but on this notion of what does it mean
to be an organism intelligent enough to
be aware of your the inevitability of
your
on mortality right that's based on
ernest becker's work the denial of death
which is a great book i think he's
fundamentally wrong but it's a great
book nonetheless he's wrong in a very
interesting way and he's very very smart
person so the denial of death is a great
book and i'm familiar with some of the
major researchers in the
in terror management area i've met a
couple of them and we've had some
discussions
excellent so yeah so that's how i kind
of got started and you know so i so i
ended up changing
labs which people might not you know
your listeners and viewers might not
really know what that means but that's
kind of a big deal it's it's it's kind
of a dicey thing to navigate in graduate
school as you get accepted typically
you know you're accepted by a person to
work with them in their lab
um and then to be like well i want to
move to a different lab it's it's kind
of a big it's like switching an
apprenticeship
right right and it can go quite wrong
yeah so it's risky it's a risky move but
i you know when i started grad school i
wasn't i wasn't really sure what i was
doing i went to a small one as an
undergrad i went to a small commuter
college and there was no you couldn't
work in a lab there wasn't anyone doing
research so it wasn't like what a lot of
like you know my own students have the
opportunity for you know undergrads to
work in my lab and get a sense is this
for me so i had no idea um so when i
started i really didn't know what i was
getting into and so when it you know
when i when i had the opportunity to
potentially change labs i you know i
negotiated it carefully so no one would
be offended or anything it certainly
didn't want to hurt my own future
prospects in the field but everyone was
fine with it
what did you find compelling about
terror management theory and can you
outline it a bit for everyone we could
have a bit of a discussion about that as
well
yeah yeah of course so
what i found compelling about it was and
i do have you know i do have um
some issues with it i'm not in total
agreement with it in its purest form
but what i found compelling about it was
really the writing of ernest becker that
it is based on which is this notion of
what does it mean
to be so smart that in a lot of ways
where you know as becker pointed out
humans are have godlike
imaginative capacities right we can we
can fantasize about all sorts of things
we can do all you know we can engage in
all sorts of mental
um
exercises in which we can which has
allowed us to transform this planet
right and even
send people into into space what does it
mean to have that intelligence yet at
the same time know that you're a
biological organism that no matter how
smart you are you can't outsmart
your your own demise and not only that
that it can come without warning
so you can
you can exercise and wear your seatbelt
and drink green tea and everything else
you're told to do
and maybe if you're lucky you'll avoid
an early death but that doesn't change
the fact that you know when this podcast
is over i could take a walk out the door
feeling pretty good about my day and get
run over by a truck
and you know so that's what you know so
so what becker and then ultimately some
of the terror management scholars
pointed out as or they argued was that's
that's so it's always kind of in the
background right um the threat of
mortality it's not you're not con we
don't you know we've got things going on
we're not consciously thinking about it
most of the time but we're aware of it
and
becker tried to bring closure to
freudian psychoanalysis and so people
are interested in freud could read
becker because he did a good job of
modernizing freud and he claimed that we
needed an immortality project to set up
against
the mortality and the terror that it
held for us and that we were compelled
to identify with large-scale
systems in an attempt to muster a kind
of immortal heroism as an antidote to
the to the terror of death
he thought of that i think essentially
although he wavered someone in the book
essentially as delusional and i think in
some sense from my perspective that was
where he went wrong
because i'm not i'm not convinced
precisely that it is delusional in its
fundamental essence but but
plenty of people would debate that
i think you and i are on the same page
about that i would agree i don't i don't
think it's delusional and you know
there's you know some other issues maybe
i i think that people can take with some
of the theorizing but ultimately the
terror management theory for people who
you know aren't familiar with it is is
taking those ideas of becker of saying
that well because of this awareness and
mortality which becker our dude would
otherwise be paralyzing if you didn't
have this hero project to engage in um
that and that's why the book's called
the denial of death right at some level
you have to deny that that's it right
this and
and you have to transform yourself into
something symbolic and so one of the
arguments that that becker made is as
humans live in kind of two
kind of two worlds we live in the
material physical world that you know
every morning when you wake up and have
your aches and pains and need to go to
the you know go to the restroom you're
you you become well aware of your
animality right your creatureliness but
we also live in this imaginative
symbolic world where we're able to
create works of art world religions all
sorts of you know all sorts of
interesting things and that world is the
world of meaning that we we seek to
create and ultimately that is the the
world that's immortal because
i know that you know i'm gonna die
um but i can be part of a project like
you said i could be part of a heroic
project that outlives me so in in a lot
of religious traditions that might be
very literal right and they're a belief
in an afterlife but becker also argued
that we have
the ability to engage in symbolic
immortality projects as well so passing
down our genes or creating works of art
or you know building communities or
things that outlive us um to the extent
that i can say part of myself
um is is in those projects then part of
myself lives on um even if even if i
don't physically
and so that gets into you know that
takes us back to the to the terrorism
idea because you know one of the
arguments was that well you know you're
gonna die and there's not much you can
do about that but
if you if you invest yourself in
something bigger than yourself and that
thing lives on
um then you have some type of
immortality and i don't do you remember
that movie braveheart
yeah i interviewed the director a few
weeks ago on my podcast oh really well
there's a great scene in there where
he's trying um
william wallace is trying to
motivate the
the people to overcome their their fear
of what is clearly
a lopsided battle all right
um and he does like everyone he and he
has this speech where it's like you
could all go home and right now
and maybe you'll live
perfectly fine complete lives and but
one day you'll be old on your deathbed
and you'll look back on this and maybe
you'll you know maybe you'll wish that
you would have gone for it
right because this is a bigger
this is going to be a more enduring
a meaning project than you just going
home and you know having a normal normal
life course
um and so
part of what got me about becker i mean
becker said at the beginning of the
denial of death that he never read jung
and that was a big mistake because much
of carl jung's writing centered on
the immortality project from a different
perspective than freud jung didn't
consider
the participation in the hero project as
delusional
he thought about it as centrally
adaptive and it seems to me i mean the
attack i've taken is that
the meaning that people derive from
being embedded in significant projects
is an antidote to the terror of
not so much mortality but fragility i
would say because there's actually
things you can be a lot more afraid of
than death i believe
and that that's not illusory i mean it
can be right it can become delusional
but
it's not reasonable for me to believe
that the projects that we undertake the
heroic projects let's say even such
things as raising a family are the
denial of death they're an attempt to
extract meaning out of finite life and
and
i suppose it's also too much of a
cognitive theory for for my liking
because it doesn't take other elements
into account like the existence of a
religious instinct let's say or
something like that
so
despite that i have a lot of regard for
the book i think it's a brilliant book
yeah yeah no no i agree with you and but
that's that's kind of how i got started
is i i so i entered this lab at the
university of missouri and we were doing
so the idea was the people who started
terror management theory i think they
wrote like a theoretical article or
something and presented it maybe like at
a social psychology conference
in the the early 80s and people were
like hey that's all sounds really cool
but it's totally untestable
and so i think that was the initial
reaction and then so what what they did
is they tried to create a series of
hypotheses that they could test and
one of them
um you know the most common one but
certainly not the only one is what's
called the mortality salience hypothesis
which basically is
if it's true that you know the awareness
of death is the thing that provokes
our investment in these belief systems
and as well as the self-esteem project
which you know becker talked about a lot
then temporarily heightening people's
awareness of mortality should in turn
temporarily heighten their defense
of these systems right right so that's
when they started doing experiments that
was solomon greenberg and posinsky
correct right yeah they wrote a book uh
called the worm
at the core the on the role of death in
life that came up in 2015 i haven't
looked at that book i've talked to
greenberg and and solomon about about
their work before they'd be good to have
on this podcast actually i hadn't
thought about that so so yeah so so they
would bring people into the lab and and
remind them in various ways of their
mortality and then look at the effects
on their beliefs the putative effects
they also had a hell of a time
publishing their work to begin with was
resisted quite quite stringently quite
assiduously by people in the field
yeah i think so i mean
in a lot of the resistance it seems to
be this is to
philosophical it's too abstract it's
hard to pin down and understandably
because i mean one challenge you know
one of the challenges that people have
made to the theory
is
when you make people aware of the
mortality or when you heighten people's
awareness mortality regardless of how
rigorous of a control condition you have
so you can say for instance well maybe
the problem with death
is that
it's
it's separation it's isolation right and
so maybe it's really a social thing
maybe
maybe it's you're being separated
permanently from loved ones and so it's
triggering these defenses is something
social so you can try to control for
social exclusion or things like that but
one of the challenges is regardless of
what type of um control condition you
have
um by nature death is a it's it's a real
thing it's not an abstraction and it's
multifaceted it's multi-dimensional
because you do worry about all these
things right we and there is um there
are some israeli
um social psychologists who were also
victor florian i don't know if you've
heard of him um and mario mikelinser
they were also doing this kind of
existential psychology
and they were looking at um the
awareness of death more through this
multi-dimensional perspective that when
people are the the fear of death isn't
just a fear of annihilation which is
kind of what becker focused on but it is
the fear of on
there's uncertainty about what's gonna
happen
after you die there is so there is a
social element of it too which is i'm
gonna be separated from the people i
love
um there's a fear of pain i mean so
there is a whole bunch of other stuff
packed in there and it's hard when you
when you make people aware of death
you're bringing online all of that stuff
and so how do you it's a bit it's a bit
complicated to disengage yeah it's not
obvious too whether like death is a
subset of an uncertainty or uncertainty
is a subset of death terror i mean part
of the problem with becker's theory is
that a lot of beliefs are actually
representations of way to ways to act in
the world that stabilize the world right
so if you have a theory about something
you act it out and you get what you want
then you validate the theory and you
indicate to yourself that your knowledge
is sufficient to protect you from
uncertainty well the ultimate
uncertainty in some sense is your
annihilation i mean you can make that
case but you can't say that all belief
systems function to specifically inhibit
the fear of death i mean that
he would say that that's the worm at the
core which is of course what what
solomon greenberg and poginski talked
about in their book and and but i'm not
i'm not even completely certain of that
because like i said i think there are
things that you can be more afraid of
than death pain right might be one
yeah yeah so it yeah so i agree with
that so there are the kind of hard-line
terror management people that take the
position you just articulated which is
this is a this is the core this is the
core existential issue um but then there
are people more like me who sees death
as one of a number of potential
existential threats
and
in addition to that um
even though early on in my in my career
because i worked in the terror
management lab and so i was largely we
were largely running these types of
studies where you make people aware of
their death and then you know you you
measure a bunch of things um after that
i really started getting more into a
more what i would consider a more
complete
existential psychology and this is an
oversimplification of course but
um you could you can kind of think of
existential psychology as having like a
dark side and a light side in some ways
and terror management and becker that
was kind of you know the
the edgier dark side which is
ultimately what meaning about is
it's a defense system right like people
are afraid
people you know people are aware of
these vulnerabilities and it makes them
afraid and so they dogmatically cling to
beliefs
in order to reduce that fear so that's
right so it's an extension of freud's
notions of religious belief as a as a
defense mechanism and and you can see
the freudianism sleep slipping through
there and that is the issue is it
what's the difference between a defense
and an adaptation
right and you know on one hand culture
you could say that your identification
with your culture allows you symbolic
immortality but you could also say yeah
well it builds your house so you don't
freeze to death in the winter too right
so it's not just symbolically present
preventing your death say let's say or
protecting yourself against your fear of
death it's actually stopping you from
dying which is not a trivial
issue
right right of course
and and and so there you know and then
there's but there's the second side is
you know we might call the light side
which is more of what people might be
familiar with in the positive or
humanistic psychology tradition which is
humans aren't just trying to defend
you know they're not just in this
defensive
mode
we also are explorers we're growth
oriented right so
part of what we're striving for isn't
just to you know to defend the world as
we know it it's to create new beliefs
and to explore new ideas and so you know
even when i was in grad school because
there were some positive psychologists
in the department and then i was in this
terror management lab you know i had the
opportunity to work
with with different to collaborate with
different people that was what was great
about our program is they very much
encouraged um
people to go work with with other
professors so even starting in graduate
school i was starting to explore the
tension between psychological defense
and psychological growth motives um
you know so this idea is that you you
need both right because
um like in artistic or creative pursuits
sometimes you can do things that bring
you so outside of the structures that
provide
you know um protection that provides
psychological defenses that they can
leave you very vulnerable right um to
anxiety
and to chaos right as you know um and
then so you might kind of retreat a
little bit look for your protection um
and so balancing that yeah that's just
like when a child you see this in
children i mean when they start to
explore
they move out away from usually their
mother but it can be anybody they're
stably bonded with they move out to
explore until they hit a threshold where
the fear of being isolated overwhelms
the compulsion to explore and then they
run back to become to be comforted and
then they explore next time a little bit
farther and that meaning that's
associated with exploration isn't the
same thing as dogmatic protection from
uncertainty right so there's at least
two things going on there there's the
the orienting that dogma gives you in
the world which is your crystallized
knowledge let's say but there's the
meaning that's intrinsic in extending
that knowledge that also seems as a it's
like an existential antidote to
suffering and to even to mortality
assailants because you get lost in that
right and that's yeah you get immersed
in that engrossed in that and and that's
central to the idea of meaning i think
yeah yeah totally i totally agree with
that and so i became i became very much
interested in that and you know i was
using these kind of regulatory
self-regulatory models of like approach
avoid
behavioral inhibition behavioral
activation right and so that was
something i became very interested in
was what shifts people towards
you know a threat shifts people towards
defensiveness right because you you face
a threat and then you're like well now's
not the time to be super creative or
open-minded now's the time to be
vigilant
right to shrink yeah you saw that after
9 11 right everyone was shell-shocked
and retreated for a while in a state of
surreal existence
right right yeah so that you know so
that's kind of how i got started um in
existential psychology and then i ended
up you know this is going to seem like a
like it's a bit
off message but it connects which i
ended up studying the psychology of
nostalgia and it turns out there
there wasn't you know there's there's a
long history of the theoretical writing
and you know kind of case study and
anecdotal writing on nostalgia
speculating things like it's a
neurological disease to it's a it's a
form of repression and all these
different things but there wasn't really
much empirical research on it except in
the area of marketing and marketing
researchers were doing they were doing
some neat stuff but they weren't
interested in
kind of getting down to the mechanics
the psychological mechanics of nostalgia
instead what they were doing
was just seeing does nostalgia predict
consumption right does if you're
nostalgic for something do you want to
go buy it
and but why you know they weren't really
answering why so i started doing
research in in the psychology nostalgia
again this was in grad school
and part of my motivation for that was
similar to the to the ideas we've been
talking about you know people turn just
like people are aware of their the our
ability our temporal consciousness right
our ability to move the self through
time allows us to go into the future and
think about our mortality as we've been
talking about so that we we think that's
somewhat unique to
to to humans right that we can think
long into the future and think about a
future without us and so what i thought
was interestingly that might provoke us
to turn to the past because if i'm
thinking about a future and it makes me
anxious or uncertain i can look to the
past at meaningful memories and i can i
can kind of comfort myself to be like no
you know i've i have had a good life i
have people that care about me i've done
interesting things and that can make me
feel
um that can kind of
reinstate or you know boost my meaning
if i'm feeling you know feeling
potentially meaningless because of the
inevitability
of my
mortality so that's why i started
studying nostalgia as a as a as a
psychological
defense
but what's cool about doing research as
you know is you might have ideas of how
things are
and so you you know you propose
hypotheses and you test them but then
there's also this kind of discovery
process
you know why you're doing a bunch of
studies where you you're looking at the
data and you're just thinking oh wow
there's some there's a story here that i
missed
and what i was finding when we were
doing nostalgia research um is we were
asking people
to detail and writing a memory that
makes them nostalgic and
and so we have all these like long
narratives of people talking about
nostalgia and one thing that i i thought
was interesting but did not expect was
how much of these narratives were
actually kind of future focused and what
i mean by that is people would say
things like when i was a kid i used to
spend summers at grandma's house
and it would you know these this this
was awesome and it was a great time and
a and i and
i'll always cherish these memories it
makes me sad that my grandmother's no um
longer alive and so that's gone i i
can't return you know i can't return to
that experience but it makes me hopeful
for the future because i want to do that
for my grandchildren someday and so what
what i saw
in a fair amount of these nostalgic
narratives were was this kind of
self-regulatory processes where people
were like dipping into the past
to bring to mind a memory that they
found particularly meaningful and that
felt that that was comforting it was
also a little bit sad you know nostalgia
is a ambivalent emotion
but then they were using that was
inspiring them like that was motivating
them that was saying you know what that
was special
so i should you know i should orient my
life in a way
that allows me to reproduce something
well right well that's the purpose of
memory right i mean people think that
the purpose of memory is to remember
things as they happen and that's that's
really rather shallow conception
psychologically i mean you remember bad
things so you don't repeat them
and you identify good things so that you
know what good things are and you can
pursue them it's it's a very pragmatic
process when it's when it's well when
it's fun when it's properly functional
there's no reason just to have an
objective record of the past in your
head you want to mine it for
significance and so it's very
interesting that that nostalgia took
that future oriented turn
so you think people get meaningless
let's say and they get a little bit
desperate so they turn to the past and
they look for things they search for
places that were meaningful they think
oh that was valuable maybe i could
pursue that
in the future
yeah yeah i think so and that and so
i've now done
dozens and dozens and dozens of studies
on on on the psychology
of nostalgia and which has you know led
me and not just me but you know a number
of other researchers to to kind of
position nostalgia as this
as being a motivation as having this
self-regulatory or motivational purpose
which is exactly what you just said
which is i might be experiencing
loneliness or even boredom
or uncertainty or you know something's
going on and i don't feel totally stable
in life i'm missing something
and so i reach into the past
um and and i think it's it's good to
think about it that way i re it's not
because a lot of there's a popular
conception of nostalgia that it's hiding
in the past that you're avoiding your
problems that you're avoiding the future
and so there's a very negative attitude
in some
in some quarters of like nostalgia is
bad because it gets in the way of
progress but my argument is no what
happens is you're not running to the
past and hiding you're reaching into the
past to pull into the present
experiences that will help guide you
and then that puts you on the path
forward that and you know now we've done
a number of studies um in which we find
that you know after people
engage in a nostalgic writing
task that they subsequently feel more
optimistic and motivated and also
it also increases actual
behavior so when people write about a
nostalgic experience which is typically
social it's typically an experience
shared with loved ones they subsequently
want to go out and do things with people
right they're like hey that was really
good i should do that again
and so i think that's that really got me
thinking more about
this not just a growth oriented approach
but that people move back and forth
between
defense and growth right and
you can also imagine that that could
become pathologized like anything you
know i mean if you're you know people
fantasize about what they want
and then out of those fantasies they can
derive goals and begin to act in
relationship to those goals or they can
just spend more and more time
elaborating the fantasies and not moving
at all and that can lead to delusional
thinking if it's taken to an extreme but
that doesn't mean that fantasy per se is
a pathological activity just that when
it becomes a substitute for action
then it can become pathologized so
yeah yeah definitely i mean yeah you
know i always say nostalgia is like a
lot of things that
um are generally good for you that you
know people can i mean there are people
who over exercise right that you know
physical fitness is good but there are
people that spend too much time at the
gym and then it ends up causing injury
um because they're you know they're
doing too much of a good thing right
there are lots of people who drown from
drinking too much water as it turns out
as well so you know anything in excess
can be a poison
yeah so i'd say for the you know for the
typical person you know nostalgia is a a
relatively
healthy activity that helps them kind of
figure out what's important
in life do you know what elicits it in
particular is it loneliness or what are
there particular listening factors
yeah yeah so there's two general classes
of nostalgia triggers one is very
obvious because it's just you know what
we call sensory inputs which is you hear
a song come on the radio or somebody
puts like a photo up on social media and
so that's a direct trigger of reminding
you
right the smell right scent yes scent
evoke nostalgia is very powerful so
there's those what you know what we call
direct triggers and there's what we call
psychological triggers and they tend to
be
negatively at negative affect um
typically loneliness but other things as
well so
so we've done this where we've induced
we've used like emotion inductions we've
had people watch you know watch video
clips that either make them happy or sad
or have a more neutral affect and so
it's not just the case that any emotion
provokes nostalgia it tends to be
negative emotions so when people feel
sad when they feel loneliest when we ask
people um
loneliness is the most common
trigger um but we've also looked even at
boredom we've done these experiments
where we have people do these really
really boring tasks where they're just
spending a period of time writing down
concrete mixture you know the formulas
for concrete mixtures or things like
that so it just seems like a meaningless
task which which which increase
subsequently increases nostalgic
feelings um
we've looked at me like meaning threats
we've had people read existential
philosophy essays that remind them of
how insignificant their life is and you
know that that increases um nostalgia
but because of the social nature of
nostalgia and that is most nostalgic
memories do involve
um time spent with with loved ones so do
you suppose that's a is that a
an analog do you think of the security
seeking behavior that that we discussed
a little bit earlier you know when a
child goes out and explores and then
hits a wall
they return to something comforting and
you know almost all higher cognitive
functions
are elaborations of something that's
much more basic so i mean affection
between adults looks like it's an
elaboration like deep affection it looks
like it's an elaboration of infant
attachment circuitry and so
you you you make people bored or you you
put them in a bad mood and then they
return to the security of social
interactions in the past and you could
think of that as purely defensive but it
also indicates to them what they did
find meaningful and they can use that in
a positive way
yeah
yeah i think exactly that i mean in fact
um we've looked we've done some work
looking at nostalgia and attachment
theory and it does seem like nostalgic
memories kind of you know they're
basically bringing online these
attachment schemas these frameworks that
people use and in fact when you look at
interactions between
people's scores on attachment scales it
is the people who score high
attachment security or what you know
modern psychologists would say low
attachment anxiety or low attachment
avoidance
right so these are these are healthily
attached people who had decent maternal
relationships and right that's another
indication that this isn't
psychopathological
right so they those people get the most
social benefits out of nostalgia one
when you look at the content of their
memories people who have
are high in attachment security
those people have their nostalgic
memories tend to be more social and they
tend to be more intimately social so
nearly what i mean by that is if you ask
somebody to write down a nostalgic
memory or to just share with you a
nostalgic memory for nearly everyone
it's social
but if you if you look at the writings
of people who are um high in attachment
security um they tend to get into more
intimate or more detailed
uh they it carries more themes of law of
love and like strong body and so again
like the attachment system they're
really saying they have a secure they
have these very deep secure bonds they s
they approach the interesting you know
to see if people who are indulging in
in nostalgic memories that are
associated with attachment to see if
their animal more analgesic to pain
because they right because they know
that loneliness and social isolation
look like they're pain related phenomena
at least according to people like yak
pancep and so hypothetically
bringing to mind a social attachment
memory that's deeply meaningful should
make you more
pain
tolerant we used to use this thing that
i referred to as a finger crusher which
it wasn't it was just a weight a
weighted blade dull blade that pushed on
a finger here like that yeah
and then it the pain sums across time
until you tell the people take your
finger out when you think a reasonable
person would
and you can ask them when does it hurt
and then you can measure when they take
it out and you can do it with a couple
of fingers to get a good you know
repeated measure
and we tested i never did publish this
study but we tested at harvard with an
undergraduate we had people interact
with a dog
they had to like dogs and then tested
them for analgesia afterwards and they
were more analgesic as a consequence of
interacting with the dog
hmm that's interesting yeah no that
would that would be that would be a
really cool study it's not the same
thing but there and this isn't research
i did but so there were some researchers
that looked at um nostalgia in the
context of feeling of actual physical
feelings of of warmth and the idea was
was kind of like what you're talking
about like we associate relationships
with comfort and warmth and emotional
warmth right and so they did things like
manipulate the temperature
in in the room and in the lab and then
had people
you know kind of estimate it and you
know people in the nostalgic condition
thought their room was warmer
and yeah i would say that is analogous
you know and that's a good example too
of how these
these
sources of meaning are not merely
cognitive right i mean one of the things
that i studied pain responses for quite
a long time in their differentiated form
and so frustration produces a pain like
state disappointment does grief does
and
people use tactile contact as a
mediation for pain and for grief and
it's about the only thing we know of
that's actually useful for grief real
touch
and pain one of panceps one of the
people that was um
uh
affiliated with pancep
did massage with premature infants
in their incubators and accelerated
their growth up to the rate of normal
neonates and the the effects this was
three ten minute massages a day the
effects were
uh measurable six months later in terms
of physical and cognitive development
and so these aren't these aren't
cognitively precisely cognitively
mediated meanings they're they're really
embodied it's interesting though because
you can
call them to mind which is a
abstract cognitive representation of
something that's much more physical and
tangible but they're not delusional and
they're not just meaning systems they're
something far more basic than that
right do you know what the what the
state of the the science is on i
remember years ago there was a there was
a lot of excitement about
um some social neuroscientists that were
they were arguing that social pain
the the neurosystems built upon
the same frameworks as physical pain and
so that it may be that you could even
i think they were you know doing studies
where they were giving people
um
like acetaminophen or i can't remember
yeah that was paul meister yeah um i
don't know what the status of his
research was but i regarded that as
pretty well established i mean
if the pain system is very
very ancient from an evolutionary
perspective you'd expect it to have
branched out and differentiated into all
sorts of higher functions and if you
look at
the drugs that affect response to
frustration disappointment grief they
tend to be opiates
so that's another line of evidence
that's all documented quite nicely in
jeffrey gray's book the neuropsychology
of anxiety because he talks a fair bit
about the difference between
pain and
so that would be physical punishment
what it elicits as a state which would
be pain-like and anxiety say which is
elicited by threat of punishment and not
punishment itself and opiates are good
at
moderating
punishment-like responses pain
essentially so i think it's well
established in the animal literature
some of that the human researchers
caught on to that but
yeah it was the annual researchers who
nailed it down
yeah yeah so so you know so that's kind
of the
the area that i you know started doing
work nostalgia specifically um that kind
of branched me away from
just thinking about while we're doing
these kind of defensive studies right
where we threaten people and then see
what they defend both intentions
just out of curiosity another thing that
would be interesting is that if
if
nostalgic memories of attachment
ameliorate feelings of depression
because depression looks like a pain
phenomena as well at least in some of
its manifestations
yeah so i don't know if there's i
haven't done anything looking at actual
like clinically depressed
people so most of the nostalgia work i
i've done has been and you know for lack
of a better term what we call the normal
population right um so i haven't you
know done work with with clinical groups
but certainly in
in our research among you know the the
normal population we find that nostalgia
does have effects that you would you
would you would predict would reduce
depression because it does reduce
loneliness it does reduce negative
affect it does reduce anxiety it
increases positive emotions and it does
things that um that counter that counter
depression like it increases optimism
and inspiration so you know but it's an
open question about wall what if you
looked at severely depressed right but
no all those pieces of evidence that you
cited do suggest that at least with
normative levels of depression it would
be it would have an ameliorating effect
so yeah so and there you know that that
is a
i know there is a whole nother
literature on reminiscence therapy and
you know that
the stuff we've done has been more
experimental
um but i think that i think you could in
you could certainly connect nostalgia is
a big part of the reminiscence therapy
well um the reason i think that you know
we haven't really is because a lot of
the reminiscence therapy
um people they're not particularly
interested in basic scientific questions
so they're not trying to tease apart the
specific
um you know cognitive and affective
mechanisms they want uh something that
works
right so they kind of deliver a whole
package and and so
in the reminiscence therapy work a lot
of it is what we would consider in the
experimental world kind of confounded
right because they're doing a bunch of
stuff at once they're bringing to mind
nostalgic memories but they also
typically are in the context of a group
setting where they're they're talking to
other people and sharing memories with
other people so then you know you have
to get into well is it the nature of
this conversation that they're having
with people where they're talking about
you know things that are really
important to them or is there something
specific about the actual memories that
they're that they're
engaging in
but what i think our research does is it
complements that by saying well if you
just isolate the experience of bringing
the mind the nostalgic memory in a
laboratory cubicle where people are by
themselves and you get these positive
effects it suggests that at least part
of what's happening in in reminiscence
therapy
is this individual level experience of
bringing nostalgia nostalgic memories to
mind revisiting reconnecting with them
and then i'm sure it only helps if you
have the opportunity to talk about those
memories with other people and share
those memories in fact that's a new area
of research that we we don't have
anything published in yet but i had a
phd student who actually just graduated
and this is what her dissertation was on
is what she called shared nostalgia and
her argument was
what we do in the lab is not very
typical of how most people actually
experience nostalgia which is people
tend to be nostalgic when they're around
others you get together with family
members and you talk about you talk
about memories um you especially in the
context of loss you go to a funeral or
um what do you do you're sad of course
but then you talk about memories you
shared with that person and oftentimes
people are laughing and you know you
know trying to honor that person's life
but also trying to connect over
you know over the meaningful memories
you had together so a lot well it
reminds you of your affiliation with
those other people too which would be a
great thing to have happen when you're
experiencing a significant loss
yeah absolutely so i do think that um
there's there there's some more research
to do in that area and we're like i said
we're just kind of getting started into
how to act how do people actually share
nostalgia and might it serve even beyond
the individual and beyond like the more
interpersonal relationships we're also
interested in nostalgia at the cultural
level because there are there are ways
that we might pass down
traditions
and rituals
intergenerationally that connect so so i
might have a lot of things that are
different
in my life and the experiences that i've
had at the time period in which i grew
up than somebody 20 30 40 years older
than me but to the extent that there are
things that are passed down
in the family or in the community that
can connect me to that person that might
help with intergenerational
community life
right and so for just to make social
cohesion period
right now
if if we're strangers to one another and
then we can identify elements of our
past experiences that we share maybe
like shared love of a particular band or
something like that then we're
identifying areas of commonality and
perhaps decreasing our distrust of one
another i mean robert putnam has
demonstrated that you know communities
tend to be more generous politically
when they view
those in the community as importantly
similar to them
and so
you can imagine that going through the
search for a shared past and identifying
commonalities might be also a way of
generating a shared history across time
as part of what unifies people together
yeah absolutely so this is what we call
collective nostalgia what you just
articulated which is
um i might you know i might have not
never met somebody who lives across the
country
um but to the extent that you know that
we have as americans that there is
something that we've expect um that we
identify with
like even music like you said or or or a
movie if you remember when
um
i don't think they were particularly
good movies but when the the new um star
wars
movies came out people were really
excited about them because there was you
know there was this collective nostalgia
of we all remember
when we were um watching the original
star wars movies and that was you know
kind of like a a quintessential
late 70s early 1980s american
you know thing to do that we could bond
over
and yeah well it's part of it's part of
experiencing a shared myth it's not
trivial i mean it's true in one sense
but it's not true at all in another i
mean we don't exactly know what it is
that bonds people together in a
community family a community a nation
any of those things and the idea that
it's shared positive memories is
well that's got to be part of it
yeah yeah i actually talked to a a
a screenwriter
a while back about this and he made an
interesting point he was talking about
how
because we have um the way with the
internet and with all these different
entertainment options we have now
you know his argument was we might be
losing some of the the shared
media shared entertainment now people
talk about this when they talk about
news all the time they say oh people
consume different news but to the extent
that he was making even the point that
we have all these like dedicated
children's programs where he was talking
about when he was a kid he had to watch
whatever his dad was watching and so his
dad would introduce him to western
movies or whatever and the whole family
would watch the same thing and and so
you had this shared cultural
um artistic experience that that
connected you but now he's like you know
you know you might the kids might be in
the backseat of the car each with their
own screens watching totally separate
things and you're listening to your own
thing and
the whole family isn't crowded around
the tv together when one room sharing
the same experiences and and so we might
have very very individualistic very
tailored media experiences that make it
harder to have those
socially connecting um entertainment
yeah yeah well it makes it harder to
communicate too because you know to
communicate with anyone you have to
mostly share their experience and then
talk about a little bit of variation i
mean if you're totally opaque to one
another in terms of what you've
experienced there's so much to talk
about that you can't even gain a toehold
and you do wonder if this incredible
explosion of
of entertainment options let's say but
it's far more than that it's it's
cultural options
does produce well perhaps does heighten
the probability of the kind of
fragmentation that we seem to be
experiencing right now
yeah well that might be why every so
every now and then something's popular
enough
to where ever like
not everyone but a decent chunk of
people rally around it it becomes the
thing everyone's talking about so like
game of thrones that might be an example
where there's some kind of program that
is either so well executed
or it just you know delivers the goods
in whatever way whether it's a movie or
television show where enough it becomes
a cultural phenomenon but a lot of the
times
it's not that especially i don't know if
you watch like streaming like netflix or
things like that but like you can now
kind of you don't even have to
turn on it's not like we all have to
turn on the tv on monday night 7 p.m if
we want to watch something because
that's our chance now we can i can watch
a show that you watched five years ago
so not only
is it the case that
um there's a ton of options they're
delivered
at you know individual times i can watch
i can i i can um you know what do you
call it when people binge i can binge
watch a show
that you know you're not going to watch
for another year
if you watch it at all and again i don't
know if they're you know well it's very
peculiar too when you think about it
that we have the opportunity to you
think about something like a
marvel movie
with its that cost hundreds of millions
of dollars
that we have the technology that enables
us to experience that singly
i mean it's it's completely preposterous
i i've been associated to some degree
with one traditional culture and
they use
dance music
storytelling masks religion it's all
integrated into one thing and they all
participate in that simultaneously and
that's really the core of their culture
i mean without that they're not a people
and when you're not a people to be a
people is to be very much the same as
other people in important ways and
that's part of what makes peace
and you do wonder the the increasing
atomization of our exposure to cultural
material
what that leaves us to have in common
right
so there is a provocative argument that
some have made um people like i don't
know if you're familiar with patrick
deanen
and you know some of these um
you know like catholic traditionalists
and
i he wrote that book why liberalism
failed and you know i'm not and it's not
my expertise to i don't know anything
about like political history
and so i can't really
you know i can't really like litigate
his case form or make a case against it
from that perspective but from this
perspective of psychology i think that
he's on to something and his basic
argument is the success of liberalism is
its ultimate failure in that
if
total individualism means that i owe you
nothing right that i
that i can reject whatever you know i
can reject whatever culture i was raised
in and forged my own path
and in many ways that you know we can
think of that as being as being good
because it can mean we can uh escape
being oppressed or you know we can get
rid of bad systems that are barriers to
my liberty um but at the same time that
also means there's you know you're
it's the atomization that you're talking
about that it can be very alienating and
it can get ultimately it can get to a
point where what he calls anti-culture
which is it's not just individualism is
another culture which is what cultural
psychologists you know tend to argue
that there's collectivist cultures and
individualistic cultures his argument is
that it's an anti-culture because it's a
rejection of culture and again i might
maybe i'm um misrepresenting his you
know or oh i'm certainly oversimplifying
it maybe i'm misrepresenting this case a
little bit but that is that's just one
well it's at least an open question how
much we have to have in common with one
another to live in something
approximating mutual understanding and
peace i mean it can't be nothing you
know and the people who've i don't
attend church but i have some close
friends who
insist upon its utility and who are very
intelligent people and part of the
argument they make is a cultural
arguments like well at least for one
hour a week cynical about that though
you may be
the entire community is doing one thing
that's the same
and so there's a point of focal union
there and of course the churches used to
be the center of the towns and and and
orient the town towards temporality all
of those things and so we don't really
know what we've lost when we lose those
shared
those shared rituals and and shared
beliefs
right and and we don't know what we've
lost when
when when part of the part of the reason
we've we've lost is of course people are
you know people don't believe and so
people are becoming non-religious but
you know i have an argument that
you know part of belief is
is is it kind of an individual
difference and so
it could be the case that there's always
been varying degrees of people who are
extremely committed to a faith versus
people who are just tend to be more
skeptical
regardless of the state of scientific
knowledge and this gets to you know what
some people have argued as like the
extreme male brain idea
is it related to interest in people and
interest in things correct oh good oh i
always wondered about that
yeah so the people who are interested in
things are much less likely to be
religious believers i would presume
correct correct so there is an argument
that some people have made that
um
that so that religion is very much
relies on
social cognition right it relies on the
same neural processes
um involved in thinking about people
like like you just said because to
spirituality you have to animate the
world with minds in a way right you have
to anthropomorphize you have to so you
could have a in fact in some
in some cultural traditions that you
know we have our big five personality
model of course but some cultural
traditions they have a spirituality
dimension of personality uh you know
it's recognized that people just
naturally vary in the west we tend to be
a little bit more blank slateist
about about religion
people tend to think well you just
decide to be religious or you were
raised it's just a matter of cold
cognitive belief rather than a
temperamental proclivity
right so um but you know but at the same
time we we say things like people have a
calling or
and maybe secular people don't say that
but they um but people kind of recognize
that there's individual
differences in what in what people some
people are good artists right some
people are just more artistic
and some people just so some people just
more likely to see the world as as a
little bit enchanted whereas others are
just more naturally skeptical and so um
so let's just assume for a second that
that's true that there's this individual
difference that's always existed where
you've had some people that are just
more interested in things like you said
and so
they might even be somewhat at the
extreme they might even be somewhat mind
blind that religion might not even they
might not even totally understand it
because they can't really tangibly grasp
it um whereas other people are you know
they're they can see the world is more
magical um and even so if that's always
existed then what you what you might
find is in the past when we had a less
individualistic culture
everyone went to church not because
everyone necessarily believed at the
same level of commitment but people
didn't have this attitude of well i'm
not going to go because i don't believe
people had more of a well i this is the
thing that we do
well it was also the case i think to
some degree that
you know part of the reason that we
don't believe now is because we have a
variety of things we can believe in and
the farther back you go in history i
mean imagine a medieval town where
christianity dominated there might have
been some jews there who would pause it
in an alternative faith let's say but
christianity wasn't so much an
explanation of the world as it was the
explanation of the world
so i mean maybe you were a brilliant
iconoclast and and you doubted certain
things but you didn't have an
alternative schema of representation at
hand like you do now
so right
yeah it was the only game in town so
so yeah so i do think that's part of it
but but
maybe there is a benefit even though we
have
more things you can believe of course
you know it people act like it's weird
if you say something to them like well
maybe it's good
from time to time to submit to things
that aren't
you know a hundred percent in an
alignment with what you want to do and
what you believe
right maybe there are you know maybe
there are benefits to being part of a
community project
and there's a recognition that it's full
of people with individual differences
that there are going to be people that
are devout believers and then they're
you know going to be people that are
more skeptical but there's something
there's a place for everybody
in this in this community i mean we do
this with with other things like
like sports
i mean some people just aren't good
athletes no matter how hard they try but
at least in american culture and i
assume it's the same and they're similar
in canada
we think that kids should
have a go at it and we think that it's
okay if
if you're not naturally gifted it's good
for you there's benefits from
participating in physical activities and
it's fun and it's a way to have
teammates and to connect with people and
to maybe learn leadership skills or
learn what it's like how to win and how
to lose and
you learn all these life skills and it's
fine that some people
aren't that you know just aren't that
good at or kind of clumsy or whatever
and so i'm not trying to say that
religion and sports are by any means the
same thing but another the point is in
other domains we recognize that there
are individual differences and that
doesn't preclude them for participating
in in the project
um and that there might be benefits for
having them more i mean i know this is a
a loaded term now in academia but
inclusivity but there might be benefits
for being inclusive
and saying that
that you know there's a place in
religion even for people who are more
skeptical and i do think that might be
the case i'm not 100 sure but i do think
that that might be the case
outside of outside of the western world
again i think in the more
individualistic cultures we're more apt
to say well what do you believe what do
you think as an individual what do you
want to do um as opposed to what is your
duty to do or what it is and what's your
relationship to the collective correct
well you could also imagine that it
might be it might be something like a
difference in fundamental cognitive
metaphors as well and those could be
different niches so imagine that the so
just for the benefit of the audience the
biggest difference known between men and
women in terms of individual differences
is interest in people versus interest in
things and men are more interested in
things and women more interested in
people on average the difference is
about one standard deviation which is
very large by the standards of such
things and so you could imagine that
maybe it's
more uh
acceptable
more understandable for people who are
primarily interested in things to view
the world
mechanistically whereas so that's a
metaphor the world is a machine and
there's a kind of determinism that goes
along with that but also a logical
analyzability and and and
a reductionism and a decomposition that
would all go along with tool formation
let's say whereas you could also
visualize being as a spirit
and that also makes sense because the
community in some sense is a spirit and
other people are spirits and so and
animals are spirits they have they're
they're personality-like and so to view
existence itself as characterized by
personality
would be a different approach but one
that would have its benefits and and and
detractions just as viewing it like a
machine might
right you know
i'm often struck by the fact that you
know it seems to me that engineers
engineer types are more likely to be
critical of mythology and narrative
religious in nature particularly because
it it doesn't align with their mode of
thinking but they tend to pick up their
mythology in in in the form of say
science fiction it it comes in a more
implicit level
right you're actually getting to um
to a series of studies that that we did
lucky looking at at this so
there was there were some surveys that
came out a number of years ago that
found that
um the more secular people were the more
likely they were to believe in ufos and
when i say that's perfect that goes
along with jung's analysis of visions of
ufos in the sky right he thought those
were those were replacements for
religious revelations the angels
essentially descending from on high
yeah yeah exactly uh michael shermer and
i talked about this because he you know
he's written about this before that he's
got a great quote that um
ufos are like deities for atheists or i
i can't remember exactly what it was but
it was something something to that
effect but what we so there there's
these surveys that find that the more
secular people are the more likely they
are to believe in ufos and not just ufos
in the sense that well we don't know
what these things are but they're
they're likely to believe that there's
intelligent
alien life
among us
um so they're really taking a leap of
faith so so that those surveys existed
but what we were interested in in our
lab was well to what if religion
um
is about meaning which there's a lot of
you know studies looking at the the
existential benefits of religion
including meaning making we're like well
if a religion is about meaning um
and people who aren't religious might be
so they might be more vulnerable to not
having meaning and thus more likely to
be searching for meaning would they be
more likely
would that explain why they're more
likely to believe in ufos so in other
words from from like a methodological
point of view what we did is we took we
looked at this correlation between lack
of belief
and um religion and a positive belief in
aliens to see if it was mediated see if
that relationship is mediated by these
these meaning making um variables and so
there there's these measures that maybe
you're familiar with called
the presence of meaning which measures
to what extent you actually see your
life as meaningful and then there's
another measure called the search for
meaning which is basically to what
extent you're currently looking for for
meaning in life they tend to be
negatively correlated not always but it
makes sense that they are because the
more you feel like your life is full of
meaning the less in need you are to go
look for new meaning
and so what we found was
what's um we found a support for a
mediation model in which the less people
believed in god
the less meaning they reported having
the more the higher they were in search
for meaning which in turn predicted
their belief in aliens and you know have
you have you expanded that to political
belief because one of the things i look
i i heard this survey once from the
gallup organization in canada now you
know you may know this you may not put
canada has had its bouts of separatism
right quebec our french-speaking
province has
put forward the plans to separate a
number of times and has come very very
close to breaking up the country
and quebec was the last country in the
west really to radically abandon
catholicism it was a really catholic
country until like 1959 and then it just
disappeared and now quebec has like the
lowest birth rate in the western world
or close to and very many um out of wed
uh
common law
households rather than formally married
and and
you know whereas in the 50s the typical
family had 12 children it's like one now
so radical transformation a very short
period of time that dovetailed with this
rise in quebec nationalism and i always
thought well you know
catholicism disappeared and the state
became the religion and then i saw a
gallup poll that indicated that if you
were a lapsed catholic you were 10 times
more likely to be
a separatist
i thought well there is evidence that
when the religious instinct falls out of
the religious domain it plummets down to
something like the political level and
then political the political becomes
religious and so you are seeing that
people who are less formally religious
so
and do you distinguish between dogmatic
belief and spiritual belief because
that's often distinguished but in any
case they're more likely to believe in
these
extraterrestrial
events any any work at all on the
political end so i haven't done any
empirical work on the political end but
what you just said is
is exactly
what i was thinking now there is some
work in this this model of compensatory
control so they're not looking at
meaning they're looking at
um a sense of control in life and
they and they've found like the the
there's there's a paper on it and i'm
trying to remember the name of it it's
called something like god or government
and basically what they find is the less
religious the society is the the more
people want big government
and so the idea is that people want some
kind of controlling structure that helps
make when when you feel personally out
of control that helps order the world
and if a society moves away from
religion they tend to be more interested
in
in government which isn't exactly what
you were saying but i i i i it's close
though it's close
i mean it it it indicates like your
research seems to indicate is that there
is this fundamental impulse towards
something approximating religious belief
and so then you might think well in most
cultures particularly traditional
cultures that
need is fulfilled by the totality of the
culture it's relatively integrated and
everything is oriented in the same
direction whereas in our culture that's
fragmented to the degree that it has
that's all gone away but that doesn't
mean that the desire for something like
coherence
is has and i can't see how it can
disappear because who wants incoherence
yeah i mean that's uncertainty and and
trouble and maybe that's driving part of
this search for meaning that you're
describing
yeah i think so and one of the things
that's really fascinating about this
because when i was doing this work and i
was writing um i was writing a book on
on all of this so i was doing empirical
work but i was also looking at broad
trends so if you look in the u.s at the
areas of the country that are the least
religious so you can look at that both
in terms of self-identified
religiosity but you can also look at
church attendance and you know other
indicators of religion those are the
places where the new age industry is
thriving right so like on the on the
coast right so you can look at that
broad level of analysis you can say the
more secular parts of society tend to be
the ones that go more in on new agey
stuff they also tend to be though and
then this gets to what you're saying
they also that also tends to
um connect with the political activism
and i remember this happening during
um during maybe the early
trump administration years that you'd
see these articles and places like the
new york times like these weren't fringe
outlets you'd see articles where it's
talking about like witchcraft the
resistance witchcraft so they're like
people so there were there were witches
that were trying to cast spells against
republicans and and donald trump and
and they you know they were there were
these articles
totally unironic like and you know it
wasn't like they were presenting this
and saying like wow these people really
believe this stuff um they were just
presenting it as this is how it is right
there's these people
so imagine this is this is something
i've read that as
it's analogous to what you're saying
that as belief in dogmatic
the dogmatic traditions of religion
decline
there's a corresponding increase in the
number of people who claim to be
spiritual
so there's a separation between
spiritual and dogmatic and so it's
really easy to criticize dogma say well
do you really believe that concrete
thing
why not make it more abstract well it's
less susceptible to rational criticism
and so that's advantageous it's more
individually tailored in some sense but
the problem is it lacks structure and
the ability to unite people you know and
obviously the problem with new age
spirituality in some sense is that
everything goes
right and there's no uniting see the
thing about dogma
because it's codified and traditional
everyone shares it
and then you can think about it in terms
of your own speaking your own thinking
as well like you and i can have this
conversation
because we accept a whole variety of
things dogmatically we can experiment on
the fringes a bit you know we don't have
to dig into what each of us means by
every single term
so we stand on dogma and make a foray
out into investigation
but when you when you get rid of the
dogma well you get rid of the blinders
and the constraints but you seem to also
get rid of the structure and the
coherence and the thing that organizes
the community and it certainly doesn't
appear to me that new age thinking is
more coherent than say catholic thinking
not not at all
right well so yeah so you're actually
getting into you know exactly what we
what we observed as it is it appears
that a lot of these new age alternative
beliefs
are motivated by the need for meeting um
but they don't seem to do a good job of
providing meeting because remember
they're inversely correlated but with
the with the presence of media and i
think for the reasons you just
articulated i mean when we have a
meaning
framework of
what some people might call dogmatic
framework everything you just said like
it organizes us and not only that but it
calls it gives us responsibilities and
duties so with this anything goes um new
age stuff you can just say like well i'm
not really into that i'm into this
but if we all if we have a shared um
religious belief that says well you have
a duty to do this like you have a duty
to take care of your family
you know you have a duty to help your
neighbor um it takes away the the
the selfishness right it takes away the
well i don't want to do that i want to
do this other thing and you know that it
might be that a lot of things that
provide meaning are
well you talk about this um
in in your latest book i just read um
about um um responsible the connection
of responsibility to meaning like
these dogmas give you responsibilities
where i think about a lot of the new age
stuff it's like you're not responsible
for anything um
you you know no one's saying that well
you have to do this or you have to do
that you can it's almost like a it's a
consumer experience of well
this works for me or this doesn't work
for me
and you know um
yeah the problem is atomization but also
that lack of well and we should talk
about meaning a little bit i wrote a
paper a long while back about different
kinds of meaning and
they're sort of paradoxical because
there's
there's the meaning that exists when
something really unknown happens
and that's a funny meaning because you
don't know what it means but it's
meaningful it's significant and maybe
you go out and explore it but then
there's the meanings associated with
things that are fixed
right that are already in place and
it seems like you need a balance between
both of those two to have an optimal
experience of meaning because one takes
you way out on the fringes where
you know you're atomized and insane and
the other well locks you into a
structure that that has no escape and no
room for you
so
the meaning is this umbrella term but
decomposing it into its constituent
elements also seems to be useful and
and that would also allow for the
investigation of what meaning suits what
situation because sometimes what you
want is the meaning of security right
you want constraint
you want not that i don't want all those
choices and other times that's not the
case
right
yeah i think so so i edited or co-edited
a book on the existential science of
religion um a couple years ago
in one of the chapters that that's um
one of the contributions to the book was
making this argument that
religion functions
um
as a meta choice um and it's for what
you just said so if it so it actually
provides it promotes freedom because
people think of religion as being
like restrictive right often they're
like well i can't do the things i want
to do because religion's telling me i
have to do here's all the things i have
to do right here's all the rules that
are imposed upon me but this argument
was religion at least done in a healthy
way
as a meta choice in the sense that
there's this this behavioral economics
type of research where if you have too
many choices you're paralyzed by
indecision so if you narrow down if you
have too few it's suffocating right so
there's an optimal level of choice in
which you're free right you're not
overwhelmed
but you can you know you have options
and so what religion
might do well
is function as a meta choice which is i
can reduce to one choice this the system
i can buy into the system that sets up
these parameters and as a as a guidebook
for how to live so i don't have to think
about every single little thing like i'm
buying i'm making the meta choice of
buying into this framework but that in
itself is a choice because you could
reject
you could say well i'm not going to do
this anymore yeah well you can think of
it in that sense as something that's
more akin to and i'm this isn't
reductionistic it's more akin to a game
i mean people aren't annoyed when they
play monopoly that they can't bounce a
basketball off the center of the board
right they're happy because they've
adopted this set of rules and it enables
a kind of cooperation and competition
that's enjoyable and constrains choice
to something approximating an optimal
uh range yeah and you could say well we
could play monopoly or we could play
katan but
fine you make that decision
you got to play something or you play by
yourself in a corner
and that that issue of being overwhelmed
by choices that's that's something that
that that people don't seem to be quite
as as uh what would you say they're not
quite as aware of if you tell people
about that they think oh yeah i know
what you mean but we our society and
maybe that's because of its
individualistic nature as we recoil at
constraint
we fail to see the fact that
we do want our choices narrowed to a
range of i mean look what's our working
memory capacity four items something
like that right our field of conscious
choice is very narrow and so when we're
presented by options that exceed that
constraint and there's other constraints
it's very easy to become anxious instead
of free
right yeah yeah it's and so this is i
mean and of course there are a number of
of people who have you know put forward
ideas like this talking about the idea
of ordered liberty or disciplined
freedom you know that you get more
freedom when your life is disciplined
like if you
if you if you don't have
um certain rules that you live by
then your life can descend into
chaos
pretty quickly i mean people do this
even when they think about something as
simple as going on
a diet
right so
if you if if somebody gives you advice
like if you went to you know if you went
to like a nutrition person or you know
you hired like a trainer or someone to
help you
lose weight or get healthy one of the
things they would tell you to do
is
if you know if you don't have certain
foods in your house you're less likely
to at night be tempted to walk into the
kitchen and eat a bunch of cookies if
they're not there but that requires a
choice of not putting them there so it's
not it's not a restriction on your
freedom right you could get your car i
guess to drive out to the store and get
cookies but you're less likely to do it
if you set up your your environment in
such a way that removes temptation
um
and so there's a lot of even very little
things we do in life that are like that
right we there you know some people
might say life hacks right where we
learn well if i do if i do this then
um i know myself and i know i'm the type
of person that after a long day's work
if i come home i'm gonna i'm gonna drink
too too much beer
and so i'm just not gonna keep beer in
the house i'm gonna make beer a thing
that i do only if i go out with friends
i mean there are people that make these
choices because they have
they know they have vulnerabilities to
um
you know over drinking um and so i think
there's a lot lots of things in life
that even beyond religion or you know
other systems in which like you said we
kind of implicitly understand that you
have to set up guardrails and rules and
people don't
scream well that's anti
anti freedom they think that's just
being sensible and being
and being reasonable
um but when you talk about certain
things like like um
like religious traditions or faiths for
some reason it seems to at least in you
know in the
in the kind of modern western secular
world
people seem to think that that's
that's more appropriate it's also i
think partly because
more academically oriented types
thinkers have proposed critiques of
religion that are very that reduce it to
a single dimension and then criticize it
along that dimension and so
the atheist types like richard dawkins
and he tends to think that belief in god
is like belief in a proposition a
stateable proposition is god real like
is a table real and it isn't obvious
that that's the proper way to formulate
that
issue
and you can make it absurd almost
immediately by reducing it to that sort
of
representation but
there's multitude of functions that
religious traditions serve and even
people like
becker
you know he basically reduced it to a
single dimension it's a defense against
death anxiety it's like well it may be
that but it certainly isn't only that
it's it's a very very complex
issue right and so but people run into
these critiques marxist critique
religion is the opiate of the masses or
the freudian critique which is well god
is essentially a projection of the
father an infantile projection of the
father it's like well yes sometimes in
some cases and in some ways but but wait
like and i guess it depends too
to s to some degree and maybe you could
tell me what you think about this
it seems to me that
the core of a culture
is something that's essentially
religious
by definition like if you look at what
unites people across
geographic geography and time
there's some central conception of the
world as spirit
that brings people together implicitly
and explicitly and then if if you
dispense with that well
well then what well you you've
demonstrated that well you get people
adopting rather odd beliefs
so that's a kind of heresy essentially
so there's an automatic tendency to
produce heretical religions that's th
that's the consequence and maybe some of
those are political
and they're fragmentary
yeah no i i agree i mean that that's
actually why i started looking at the
individual difference
level of analysis not because i was
particularly interested in
thinking about spirituality or religion
or any of these things as an individual
difference but i was interested in is if
there is people did this in the when
they talked about the need to belong you
can pretty much get everyone to agree
that humans are social and have a
fundamental need to belong that's not
controversial so you can use that as an
example and you and what researchers did
well they said well if that's true then
you would expect there to be natural
variability
everyone might have some basic need to
belong but there are going to be some
people that are very very oriented
towards belongingness whereas others
aren't going to be so much and so that
individual difference isn't a case
against the basic need it's saying that
the basic need manifests you know
differently across the continuum and so
that's pretty much my argument i think
for for religion and spirituality is
that
what you just said i i think it's true
if people if a society abandons
religion
um they don't really become
secular they start investing in all
sorts of other things you know what we
might call like a substitution
hypothesis to fill that space of you
know of the of the role that or the
multiple roles that religion was playing
in their society but then a quit an
important question you know which we
talked about a little bit is just
because people are turning to different
things to fulfill that function doesn't
mean they're actually doing a good job
of fulfilling it right
just because people are turning to
politics as a substitute religion or
ufos or new age beliefs doesn't mean
those things are actually doing a good
job
of providing meaning um so so let me ask
you this then so okay so we we've kind
of
uh come together on on on a hypothesis
here is that there there is some need
for union around a centralizing tendency
and that kind of throws us back to the
beginning of the discussion because
becker
would identify that need for the central
ten
centralizing tendency as a manifestation
of the denial of death
and we've kind of elaborated on that and
criticized it and broadened it i would
say
so it's something more like
well the need to you know imagine we
have to unite in personality to some
degree right i mean so we're ruled by a
body of laws
and it's interesting that it's a body of
laws and the laws are what we act out
so
as long as we're law abiding that makes
us a certain kind of personality and i
would say a more conscientious
personality probably a more agreeable
personality probably a more emotionally
stable personality than we would
otherwise be alone
and so imagine that for us to live in a
group we have to partake in a central
personality and deviate in our
individual ways but that that partake
partaking of the central personality
without that we get fragmentation and
inability to make peace inability to
understand each other inability to
cooperate
right and that is something like the
worship of a central spirit
at least as it's acted out
yeah
yeah i think so and also connecting back
to you know something that we we talked
about the difference between
you know more defense versus growth
perspectives it's not just the case that
um unifying around a belief is somehow
you know like becker would argue somehow
allowing us to
to escape our anxiety it's very
inspiring and mobilizing because if you
look at a lot of the projects that we
engage in that so i know you had marion
toupee on
um who's a friend um you know a number
of weeks back and he talked about the
human progress and how that people don't
see you know a lot of people don't don't
think that we've made progress yeah well
they're they're blinded by the
variability right right right but if you
look at if you look at progress there's
a lot of thing and and not just the
progress that we're we've benefited from
i mean you and i are able to have this
conversation separated by many many
miles over the internet instantaneously
communicating thanks to project thanks
to progress and technology right we
wouldn't have been able to do this um
decades ago but if you look at a lot of
projects that are focused on
making society or the world a better
place they're projects that extend
beyond
our individual lifetimes so in other
words you have to make some commitment
to say i'm not just going to be
hedonistically looking out for myself
and you know trying to have as fun of a
life as i can and then it's over
you know which some people do of course
but you have to say i'm going to give
part of myself to something bigger than
myself so that's not just a defense in
my mind that's and
you talked about something that's um
adaptive that's something that that's
very good for society to say it might
take 50 years or 100 years before we
make this cure this disease or reach
this you know make or build this
you know build this project or send
something out into space and i might not
even see it myself but i believe in it
right yeah well that thing that we unite
around
right that might be not so much a
structure of dogmatic belief as a shared
ideal some of which is described in
dogmatic terms i mean when i look at the
abolition of slavery let's say i mean
you can certainly come up with any
number of reasons why slavery is a good
idea from the perspective of the slave
owner
now the question is how the hell did it
ever get to be the case that people
decided that that was a bad thing
and it looks to me like it's the working
of that ideal across millennia really
that finally manifested itself in that
ethical decision it's like well there
was this idea and it's part of the
judeo-christian tradition that we're all
imbued with a spark of divinity that
aligns us with god that we're supposed
to act in relationship to that
and there was a logical incompatibility
between that and the
and the forces that the economic forces
primarily that that propelled
slavery forward and so
it's not just that we're united by a
dogmatic structure we're united by a a
personality that's a night that's the
ideal towards which we're trying to
struggle something like that and that
has more that of that growth-oriented
element that you're describing
right like i mean i've been struck
repeatedly by this idea recently and
perhaps it's not particularly
original that
the figure of christ in the west is at
least the consequence of a
millennia-long millennial's long
discussion about what constitutes the
ideal
look we haven't agreed exactly because
it's too complicated to fully agree on
but
i do believe that we feel guilt when we
fail to live up to whatever that
implicit ideal is
right yeah
yeah no i agree
so yeah so i do think that you know what
you're talking about of this the central
you know this that we all
kind of rally around
is inspirational right it gives people a
reason to be optimistic and i think
there are and you know i i suspect you
agree with me just based on
you know seeing some of your some of
your own discussions on on current
trends
there are reasons i think to be
concerned
that we have a growing amount of not
just people
and like hyper individualism of people
not you know
having shared you know shared culture
but also just the the the associated
pessimism and cynicism you see this in
the antenatalist
movement right you you see this and some
of the activism that is associated with
the social justice movement which is
not you know i think most of us would
agree that
um there's more work to be done in any
in
any area where you might say there's
still an you know unfairness or
injustice
um but there's this notion among at
least a certain component of the a
certain portion of these activists that
is it's not going to get better
right it's it's
it's permanent these and that it hasn't
it hasn't
in fact we just saw at the at the
challenge institute where
um when you did my introduction where
i'm i'm a scholar we actually just ran a
survey
um that will probably be released by the
time this this podcast
um
airs where
we we look we recruited a thousand um us
university students um from all over the
country
and we asked them questions about
about progress
and we asked them specifically connected
to their college experience because what
we were interested in is what are people
learning you know you hear all these
criticisms about colleges
and indoctrination but we wanted to ask
students what are they actually what do
they think they're learning and so we
asked them
um based on what you've learned in
college so far
do you think the world has gotten better
over the last 50 years and we even gave
them specific examples because you could
say well it depends on what you mean but
it got better right so we
we had examples like and
things that we knew based on the human
progress and other you know other data
points that had gotten better like
poverty
right that you know poverty has been
decreasing
um and
radically and and immensely
right and so what was amazing to me and
i can i can actually um bring up um so i
don't get the numbers wrong um so we
asked people
based on what you've learned in college
so far
is the world getting better over the
last 50 years
and not even 50 of students said yes
so half of students don't think
that the world has gotten better and we
asked the same questions about the us
as the u.s gotten better and very
similar
answers only about a quarter of the
students of u.s college students said
that they're optimistic
about the future of the world based on
what they've learned in college so far
only 11
of us college students said that their
college experience has made them have a
more positive view of the us whereas 45
percent said that their college
experiences made them have a more
negative view of the us the rest said
their view hasn't changed
and only half of students are optimistic
about say they're optimistic about their
own future
um and their and their ability to make a
difference
in the world so i could go on with with
with all these statistics but
essentially we you know we found
a number of reasons to think that
students well let me back up a little
bit so if you think about objectively if
you think about american college
students using you know using the terms
that are often used
in this discussion which is the concept
of privilege like if you think about the
concept of privilege um to be born in
america to live in america
um
you've already kind of won the lottery
i'm not saying america is the greatest
you know the the greatest place but
compared to a lot of places in the world
um there's opportunity there's you know
there's a lot more opportunity here
right so
only a small percentage of people have
that privilege already right and then on
top of that
only a minority of people get to attend
university i mean the vast majority of
the world
doesn't have the opportunity
to attend um university right
so
at some level it seems obviously true
that if you have the privilege
of attending university in america you
would think that you should be pretty
off you know you should be pretty
optimistic about your situation in life
and have a lot of gratitude about it um
but what we're finding and of course
these aren't you know these this is just
a poll these aren't experiments or
anything we're not and we're not
controlling for
personality or you know other potential
factors but um we're getting a snapshot
of
college students
not being very
one many of them not seen that
you know there's been progress so what
are they learning in college where
they're not saying hey wow like maybe
things aren't perfect but they've
certainly gotten better
um they're not seeing that and then on
top of that they're not particularly
helpful or optimistic about the future
and they don't seem to have a a real
sense of agency right that they can make
a difference in the world that they're
and again you would think that if you
were you know if you were sufficiently
blessed to to live in the united states
and go to college
that might you know from my perspective
that might come with a certain level of
responsibility right that's
you know you you you're very fortunate
and you have a duty to do something
um in the world to help others to make a
difference to you know to make your
community and your society better but it
seems like
a good portion of students aren't
particularly optimistic about that and
don't really see that they have a place
well i talked to toopey and to bjorn
lomberg and to um matt ridley these are
all optimistic sorts of characters
who've done a lot to document the
radical
improvement in absolute terms of
of human existence over the last
especially the last 30 years
and all of them know that they have a
marketing problem right it's like yeah
well why isn't this compelling
because it's just
it's an it's an uphill battle to to get
this information out there
and the question is why and it seems to
me that it has something to do with it's
in some sense too materialistic
like not that that's bad exactly because
isn't it good to have enough to eat and
all of that but there's some impetus
some spiritual impetus or something like
that that seems to be lacking and then
there's another issue i don't know if
you thought about this or not but
you know
in the christian tradition there's an
apocalypse there's apocalypse and it's
sort of
projected in some sense out into the
spiritual world
so the end of the world is at hand but
who knows when
right well so it's projected like utopia
is projected and so then you might ask
yourself well what happens if it isn't
projected is there a utopian and an apo
apocalyptic tendency in human thinking
and if so what happens if it's not
contained within a religious structure
and so i would wonder
to what degree the pessimists in your
survey have apocalyptic visions of the
future because they're certainly no
shortage of
uh
suggestions that we're facing
continually facing something that looks
like an apocalyptic nightmare and it
isn't obvious to me that that's the case
right
yeah
now you see this with what's become
almost a religious environmentalism
right of it's very apocalyptic way you
know
depending on who's talking and on what
day
it varies from
we've only got like a decade left before
the planet turns into an uninhabitable
hellscape to
you know on the more optimistic side
you'll see some people say well we can
still do something to mitigate it but
you do see
again under there there are plenty of
environmental activists that i think are
very practical very solution oriented
very entrepreneurial who are thinking
about technologies and strategies to to
make yeah lomborg is like that right
right
but then there's there's a
but there is an element
of these activists that it is almost
like an apocalyptic
mean you know meaning making religion
where because the reason i say that is
because it seems to accompany this
anti-natalist and right right view of
it's almost as if the best
so how you might ask well what's that
got to do with with meaning well it's
almost as if what they're arguing is the
most meaningful thing that humans can do
is go away
right
yes well you surrender the planet to the
other species because we've screwed it
up
um
well and the thing about the apocalyptic
like i mean when i grew up the
apocalypse was basically the threat of
nuclear war which seemed very real and
seems to have
at least
vanished to some degree in terms of what
people fear and maybe that's because the
actual risk has declined i would say
that's the primary reason i mean it
isn't obvious to me that russia is going
to attack the united states with nuclear
bombs
so and china and america well it's not a
full-fledged cold war yet
so
so but you know back in the 60s there
were many people who were entirely
convinced that everyone was going to be
starving and that we were going to run
out of resources by the year 2000 i mean
the population bomb ehrlich's book the
club of rome all these people said oh
we're going to overpopulate the planet
and we're going to run out of resources
and
we didn't and we aren't going to by all
appearances we're going to peak at about
9 billion and it wouldn't surprise me at
all if in a hundred years the
fundamental problem is that there aren't
enough children
i mean i don't know and who who knows
because 100 years is a long way away but
that apocalypse those apocalypses didn't
occur and we have the environmental
apocalypse and it'd be interesting to
see that that the more pessimistic
students that you described
do you suppose they would would they be
more likely to fall into the search for
meaning camp
would they be the ones that were more
susceptible to
alternative quasi-religious beliefs do
you do you know any of that yet
because it'll be interesting to look at
all that relationship to views of the
future
yeah no that so so there are some data
there are some data points that i can
bring up not from not from
my survey but that i think speak to this
issue
um and other issues you raised including
the materialism issue that you brought
up about progress
so for one there has been global data
looking at meaning across different
countries and as it turns out people in
poorer countries report higher meaning
in life than people in richer countries
even when you control for religiosity
the effect remains religiosity explains
part of it um
religious people
have more meaning
but even when you control for that that
that remains so what's the story there
well it could be that in poorer
countries people are naturally more
interdependent um
right you you're not as individualistic
you you have to help each other and so
you can very you can it's much easier to
see how your life matters right people
depend on well you know i just
interviewed
a man who was held in guantanamo bay for
14 years and released and he came from
mauritania
he came from a tribal society like
literally a tribal society he's only one
gender he's not even one generation
removed from that
and he went to be educated in germany
when he was an older teenager and when
he got to germany he was alone in a room
for the first time in his life
and he said it really upset him and he
said
we weren't talking about meaning
specifically but that
the meaning in his life was the
interdependence with all of his family
members whom he was never isolated from
ever
and he said specifically he talked about
his mother and said that she was an
eternal source of meaning from for him
and that that dissolved very rapidly
when he was isolated and individual and
he suffered repeated bouts of depression
before he ended up in guantanamo
guantanamo bay and so i'd never talked
to somebody who had come from a tribal
background like that so and and and was
struck by that degree of interdependence
i mean
we don't know
it and you know the students that you're
describing that are pessimistic about
the future
many material things have improved but
maybe we are more atomized than we were
50 years ago i mean i don't know
i think families are more fragmented
than they were 50 years ago arguably
yeah
and some people i think putnam again
have argued that
social institutions that pull people
together have become
much less prevalent as well i i think
did he write bowling alone was that
yeah he did yeah
yeah no i think that's true i mean
that's one of the things that i've been
you know i've been thinking out because
i i naturally
lean
you know kind of libertarian classical
liberal and so
um i think one of the
this is something i'm you know as a
psychologist i'm you know i'm always
talking to people in in this space
because it's if you're very if you're
smart and have high self-control
trait self-control and are relatively
successful
then
it's it's pretty easy to be libertarian
and think well
you know i can choose whatever i want to
believe in and i don't want to tell
anyone to do anything the extreme
libertarians like i don't want anyone to
tell anyone to do anything ever
um but you know one thing i'm always
telling you know telling these people is
but that's not how most
that's not how most people are and one
of the challenges that comes with um
with the success of the free market
which i'm a big advocate for
um is affluence right like
markets have made you know capitalism
has made societies wealthy and but
potentially have created
this psychological vulnerability that
that you're talking about so on the one
hand yes we've
progressed in many ways along material
lines but to what extent has that
potentially contributed to or created
certain vulnerabilities in our social
lives because
i don't have to even get along with my
neighbors if i have enough money i can
just hire people to do things right i
can just pay people
um for services without actually having
to compromise or negotiate and it turns
out or develop attachments
right or cooperate
yeah or inspire or mentor or lead or any
of those things right
and then also you don't do those things
that you pay other people to do which is
a form of loss often as well
right exactly so i think this is a you
know
taking us back to the to the unifying
religion idea i think this is a a good
example where
you you might need something in in a
free market society you you know having
religion
is a good counter
and people that's not a novel of course
that's not a novel observation because a
lot of people have talked about
i've talked about this in fact one you
know i'm in a business school on one of
the growing areas popular areas that
that people are interested in is ethical
leadership and the idea is people have
looked at and you know people have
looked at like the financial crisis
and all this you know the crony
capitalism and corruption of big
business and these things and people are
like
oh yeah um markets are great but if you
have people that do bad things and make
unethical decisions they can take
exploit people and they can take
advantage of people and um and so there
is this kind of ethical leadership
movement like if you want if you want
the market to work then you need people
to follow certain ethical rules not just
laws but in certain ethical principles
and in a lot of ways that's a secular
repackaging of
you know what might have been um
in the past it's just like well you have
to you you have a business world but you
also have the separate religious world
and that religious world is where you
get your morals right your business
world might tell you how to
how to sell a product um but if that
if selling that product
makes you sin or makes you violate you
know certain certain moral rules then
that's a check on you it's like i'm not
supposed to do that but if you if you
strip away that that moral framework
um and say well anything goes it's all
about making money or it's all about
material gain or it's all about it's all
about maximizing quarterly profits which
also makes it very short term
right so
um so these things you know so in a lot
of ways these i i think these belief
systems balance that and part of the
pessimism might be
um that you
that you do have in
in our you know materialistic culture
the sense of
well i'm just supposed to be well you
see this a lot with the privilege talk
it's because the emphasis is always on
billionaires or rich people or you
always you always see this like well
your life's you know your life's
gonna be horrible because you don't have
you know you're not a billionaire which
of course
nearly no one is
right it's a weird fixation because it's
like the the modal experience is not
that right so well it isn't obvious that
that would be an advantageous experience
to begin with right i mean along with
that comes the same responsibility as
running a small country
right so that's another thing too is the
fixation on uh on privilege
in terms of well people are rich or
it's it neglects the privilege of having
you know
having loving parents
or
you know you know having uh being having
access to nature or i mean there's just
so many things in life that don't boil
down to
um
to that material wealth and so that
might be that might be part of the issue
that you know like you raised with with
with people like marion toubia you know
i've talked to i know marian we've
talked about this a lot as well as
because he's he this is something that
he's grappled with is why
why can't people be like wow like i'm
just really really thankful to be alive
right now
because it's it's demonstrably better
um
than it was you know 50 years ago or 100
years ago certainly 200 or 300 or 400
years ago
but yeah maybe there is attention well
when when have you have you done
anything in your lab like a a
qualitative taxonomy of meaning so
imagine because one of the things i've
sort of thought through is uh you know
where do people derive proximal meaning
and so on and i kind of thought this
through as a clinician you should
probably about be about as educated as
you are intelligent
or there's a lack you need a career or a
job especially if you're conscientious
you need a vocation if you're creative
you need to spend your
leisure time in some intelligent and
productive and non-self-destructive
manner you need an intimate relationship
you need a family etc you can list maybe
a dozen things that seem to be proximal
sources of meaning but i don't really
have any idea how those rank order
yeah you know i mean
what is it that people require to make
them feel both secure and exploratory is
that like is that a stable network of
family and friends like what's on top
there do you have any sense of that
so we have done studies where we've just
asked people to tell us
what makes your life meaningful and it
is qualitative they just write
and then we use human coders and we've
also used coding software you know
scanning software
and not surprisingly
i mean the the most common response to
that the most you know the the most
frequent word uses in these narratives
and are about relationships family
and friends and so it certainly seems to
and that's more than people write that
more than they write about religion or
anything else we looked at this also
among um to make sure there wasn't
something
dramatically different between believers
and non-believers we were we matched a
sample and we recruited because as you
know in the united states even though a
lot of people don't go to church still
we're still talking about less than 10
or so of the population that will
identify self-identify as
as totally atheist right because people
are
um like you said people are spiritual
but not religious um so we recruited we
specifically recruited you know a sample
of people that said you know they were
the real deal like hardcore atheists and
we recruited a sample of of believers
um largely because we just we thought
well that's one dimension that might you
know people might write about different
things
and they didn't um you know basically
everyone said the same thing with what
gives their life meaning which was
family and close relationships and
people did talk about it you know so the
the coding picked up a few other things
like people talk some things about
community they talked about um hobbies
they talked about couriers
but that was um the family was what you
know was way up here and those other
things were were down here
so one thing would be very interesting
then would be to see what sort of social
networks the pessimists have
yeah
right i mean
if if you have a paucity of social net
networks especially perhaps at the
familial level but maybe you know
friends and family or in some sense
somewhat interchangeable i doubt it but
perhaps they are
maybe that's one of the things that sets
you up really badly for optimism about
the future
yeah
yeah no that's a good point and you know
one of the you know one of the things
that that concerns me of course you know
it's possible you could say well young
people
are
you know maybe more pessimistic and
they're college students and there's
something kind of edgy or
you know about being cynical and you
know they're going to grow out of this
and you know all that's all that's
certainly
possible but it seems to me like it's
just would be way more beneficial
for students to be able to say hey this
is uh
this is a real pro you know again using
you know the term privilege this is a
real privilege to be here i'm taking a
space
that probably millions of people around
the world
would
would love to have this opportunity
um and that comes with responsibility um
but that doesn't seem to be
that you know that if you talk to people
about responsibility
that that gets you almost no well that's
funny though you know because when i
when i went on my tour for my book i
went to about 150 different cities and
one of the things that brought the
audience the only thing i would say that
brought every audience i talked about it
with to a complete silence was the idea
that meaning could be found in the
adoption of responsibility
and so it was peculiar because
my original attitude would have been
much
like the one you just expressed which is
well you know good luck selling
responsibility that's what parents and
figures of authority do all the time but
the thing is they don't sell it as a
source of meaning
right right they
they sell it as a moral obligation
and that's fine because you can you can
see the moral obligation element but
what they don't explain is that in
undertaking that moral obligation you
find a sustaining meaning
right
no i totally agree i mean one thing that
you know that i think that is is
interesting where people mis i think a
lot of people misunderstand
meaning is they get that it's
social well it's like you can tell
people people find meaning in
relationships
and that makes total sense to people but
in our society people often think of
relationships in a very
um
i think about the meaning of
relationships in a very superficial
level what i mean by that is people just
like well you need people to
to like you and to support you and you
see this in the way we often approach
things in academia which is students
want to feel
supported
um
and so you see this very caregiving
approach
to
social relationships which i just want
you know we need to make sure there's no
bullying which you know okay we all
agree on that we need to make sure that
people are nice to each other and that
we have inclusive environments
but and that's all great and but to me
that's not
meaning you need to mat like
so here's the here's the way here's
again well that might be the meaning of
one kind of security that's rather
maternal in its orientation but it
certainly doesn't exhaust the range of
meanings that we might be encouraging
university students to pursue
right so imagine so here's an example
imagine that you were
so we'll use work just for you know
it'll be something people can understand
imagine you were on a work team
you a team got put together to work on a
project and everyone on that team was
very nice to you and very kind to you no
one ever said a bad word to you no one
hurt your feelings everyone was very
supported but when it came time to get
the work done
um no one was interested in your
contributions in fact they were like oh
you know you don't need to worry about
this jordan we'll take care of it oh
that's fine we all love you jordan you
know you're
um okay so think about that scenario and
think about a different scenario in
which yeah maybe there's more conflict
or you know maybe it's not high fives
all the time where people aren't
supporting you but your contribution is
valued you're making a significant
contribution to the team and people and
you're needed
well that would be more akin to a sports
team
right so i
but oftentimes we i think in our society
the first approach is what people think
of them maybe like you said it's a more
of a maternal thing that it's like well
we just need to support people
and but the problem with that is
that's not a recipe to feel like you
matter in fact people don't like over
time people figure out that you know
people are just pitying them and they
don't really need them they don't really
like them you know so you know people
need to have some skin in the game they
need to be making a contribution this
actually connects to the argument um
that i have against things like
universal basic income
um you know which we we can or don't
have to get into um but the idea is it's
great to think about taking care of
people that you know that we we like
that like it feels good to be like oh
yeah well we want to help people
but oftentimes
just just taking care of people isn't
allowing them to have agency it's not
allowing them
um to make a meaningful contribution
it's in fact it could you know one of
the predictors of of um the desire to
die by suicide is feeling like a burden
um
to you know and so you can have the
opposite effect where people feel like
well the most meaningful thing i can do
is to opt out because i'm not making a
contribution and so i'm very concerned
about
any kind of movement even as
kind-hearted as it seems
that's just about well let's just be
nice to everyone and make sure everyone
feels included and loved and supported
and that's all great but that's to me
that's not that's not meaning we want to
live in a polite society of course
um
but people need to be able to make
contributions and people need to be able
to feel that you could even look at that
from a big five perspective big five
personality perspective i mean
that provision of basic care is an
agreeable value
right so it's a it's a reflection of
trade agreeableness and well
on one end trait disagreeableness is
more associated with competition and
conflict right and there's utility in
that as well so
even
by identifying taking care of people as
the only value we don't even exhaust the
utility of trait agreeableness
and then there's the meanings of duty
and industriousness and orderliness that
are associated with conscientiousness
and the meanings of creativity that are
associated with openness and you could
maybe put security for neuroticism on
the same axis as care
conceivably
but there's also meanings of
extroversion and and
none of those are addressed with a sole
focus on
providing security to people let's say i
mean i don't know if using the big five
framework in that way is a good way of
parsing up the universe of meaning but
you know
we do know those dimensions exist
yeah no yeah that makes sense
so yeah so i think that the you know
when we talk about even social
meaning it has to go beyond
um just simple connectedness or having
you know having a lot of friends i mean
this is why if you look at like the
loneliness literature this is what
people can be surrounded by people who
love them and still
feel terribly lonely right and still
feel totally isolated even though
they're in an environment where
everyone's being being um
kind of where they have a lot of social
interaction
and so
you know that one of my concerns about
you know some of the
some of the movements that we're seeing
that i i again
going back to the pessimism thing that
seemed to come from this idea of
well
there's not going to be any jobs for
anyone everything is going to be
automated and if you do do something
it's just based on luck because some
people are really smart and so
you know they're they they're going to
be privileged in the cognitive economy
and then there's going to be people that
can't really do anything and so if
you're if you're a kind-hearted person
what you do is you just say well we're
going to financially provide for people
we're just going to take care of people
um
but to me that's
pretty insulting
but doesn't mean it may not address the
core problem which is it may not address
the core problem
and it but i i think it's it's um it's
very arrogant to assume that
you have the answers for
who can and can't contribute i mean when
i worked in when when we were starting
with you know my history when i before
going to graduate school and i worked in
social work and outpatient from clinical
mental health one of the things that we
we did because it was an outpatient
clinic is and we had people we had
people with severe schizophrenia some of
these people
really couldn't hold down
jobs um
and you know they really they were on
disability
and you know they had a really hard time
but many of them
many of them did even though they were
severely mentally ill or in some cases
in another group that we worked with had
severe developmental disabilities they
still wanted to be contributing members
to society and so what you know but the
goal of a lot of the
the work we did was was to integrate
them this is why it was an outpatient um
you know program was they needed some
support right they needed a case worker
to check on them
you know they needed an employer that
was
um open-minded to you know finding ways
for them to contribute but you know i
had this one this one client i worked
with who
um i mean you wouldn't want him in an
office place you just you but he was a
very talented programmer and so they
this employer you know this was way
before the the remote work phase
um this was decades ago but this
employer figured out well this guy can
work from home he does good work he's
you know he's got a methodical mind
um but he's just you know
he he can't be around people you know
everyone else won't feel it won't create
a good opposite environment if he's here
because he you know he has auditory
hallucinations and he's very paranoid
and he um self-medicates with alcohol
and that makes things even worse and so
he just adds a layer of chaos to the
workplace that you know we don't need um
but he can do but he actually does good
work on his time scale when he can do it
and um
and so he had you know he was he was
working like he was he was doing
something and then we you know i had
clients in another job i had that um had
severe developmental disabilities
and but they you know they wanted to go
to work they wanted to do something they
wanted to have the dignity of feeling
like um they had a job to go to
and so
um those are just a couple examples but
but that kind of experience
that kind of practical experience
stands at it you know at odds with a lot
of what i see in a very more academic
discussion which isn't based on anyone's
real life it seems it's based on these
hypotheticals of well jobs aren't that
meaningful
and
um you know some work is boring or
or monotonous and so
these the best thing we can do for these
people is just
make sure they have a universal basic
income or whatever so they can just do
whatever they want
um with their time
um but that you know like you said that
might not that brings its own hazards
right right
so
we we started this discussion talking
about ernest becker and a rather
unidimensional view of meaning but
your walk through your research and this
discussion indicates that you've as a
consequence of studying this for so long
you've developed a much more
multi-dimensional sense of meaning
that's not reductionistic in the same
way that's not merely defensive that
can't be reduced to
the terror of death or defenses against
that
and so
is there anything else you'd like to
talk about before we close
no i think we we
we covered a lot of
a lot of the areas that that i'm
interested in i mean one thing i'll just
you know i can just add that because
you're absolutely right like i've what
i've tried to do
and this is part of what i like about
being a researcher
is i've tried to just kind of follow
the data like i have i i have ideas of
course i have and i have my own biases
and
um
but i've tried like with the nostalgia
work i talked to i talked about i try
really hard to
you know test hypotheses but then look
you know kind of see what's going on and
then that gives me ideas or make
observations in in the real world and
that gives me ideas and so you're right
i have gone kind of on this journey
where i definitely started out in this
more kind of defensive approach because
that's what i you know i learned in
graduate school and have moved more
towards this explorative growth oriented
kind of creative approach to meaning and
i do think they are connected through
you know some of the attachment and
social and cultural security systems and
frameworks we talked about
um but now so i'm you know i'm even
going further in the direction of
looking at like how
meaning contributes to things like
entrepreneurship
because as you noted before
there's a certain level even if you look
at the developmental literature on
attachment like you talked about the
studies where the little kids
you know when they venture away from mom
moms the security um that gives them you
know that makes them feel like there's
something there that will protect them
which makes them a little bit more
willing to explore well if you scale
that out on a society level and we look
at topics like entrepreneurship
which involves risk taking and putting
yourself out there
and fault and oftentimes failing
repeatedly
um
is that can you imagine that same kind
of framework where you you know
a society that has
um existential
frameworks whether they be strong social
relationships religion other cultural
world views that provide the type of
security that encourages people to
innovate and to take risks and
and so that that's kind of the direction
i've been going in and
more recently which i think very much
connects to this overall project that
that we've been talking about because we
need that right we need risk takers we
need
um we need people who are optimists who
who could look at the same set as data
of everyone else and who and everyone
else feels pessimistic to be like no i
think there's a solution we just haven't
figured this out yet and i think those
people are often
inspired by
um by meaning right you need
meaning is in my world another way to
say this meaning isn't an outcome
variable it's a predictor variable right
it's because we tend to think of meaning
as an indicator of well-being um which
it is but in addition to that i would
say it's a it it's an it's a cause
it
um and fitness research they've done
some studies showing that when people
think about what's important what's
meaningful in their life they're more
likely to exercise when you feel like
your life's meaningful you've got like a
reason to get up every day and do
something and sometimes that something
is take risks to try new things because
you want to make the world better you
want to make life better for your family
and so i think that
we just have to be really careful
about um
about that like that's an important
that's an important
element of life and if you have too much
cynicism and
nihilism and pessimism and anti-natalism
and you know people don't have
any people don't feel like they've got
something to strive for in the future
then um not only we're going to see
psychological and social
decline but we'll see economic decline
as well and we won't be able to solve
the problems that people say they're
really concerned about such as climate
change if you don't have people that
believe in the future is worth saving to
begin with
those are excellent words to close on i
would say
thank you very much for talking with me
today it was very interesting the time
flew by
it did thank you so much for having me
my pleasure my pleasure
good luck with your research and
hopefully we can talk again at some
point yeah we'd love that thanks a lot
you bet bye bye bye
[Music]
you